Your first stories and novels didn't appear when they were
written. They didn't appear you were in your mid-30s or so. What had you been
doing up before that time? Well, I had a couple of careers. You
know, mine was a draftee generation. We all got drafted at 18, right into the
army, and I spent the next four years in the AOT, the Army Occupation of Texas.
We sent all the Yankees down here to teach in gunnery school in Arrow Gunnery. I
went to art school after the war and then spent 10 years as a commercial artist,
mostly in comics, and then graduated into editing, editing comics, editing pulp
magazines, so I had been around professionally in publishing for a good 10
years, which was not a handicap. I think it helped.
You were involved, from my understanding, in comics and art. Did this help you
later on with science fiction? it's a two-barrel question you know I always read
science fiction I'm the science fiction fan at the time I was seven years old
and I read this stuff right before the army afterwards and then I illustrated
science fiction and through that I knew all the authors as an artist I was Harry
the artist and I illustrated books for them and magazines and I was around
writers all the time science fiction writing I really didn't care much about
writing I cared about science fiction. So when I started stepping sideways out
of drawing into editing and writing, I wrote everything. I wrote men's
adventures, westerns, historical articles, did a fine article on the history of
Texas about the Battle of Goliad, which no one remembers but me. And then I
started writing fiction and I naturally wrote science fiction. And I naturally
sold it, I suppose, because I'd been writing a lot. I've been around the arts
for a long time. And if anything, it helped my visual sense. When you read my
stuff, I hope the rear has a physical sense of where they are and what's
happening. And that's it. Was your first sale to John Campbell? No, no. My first
sale was to Damon Knight, who I knew as an editor. He did a magazine called
Worlds Beyond. I was illustrating about half of it. And the third issue, I
illustrated almost all of it, but I got down the flu and I couldn't draw, but I
could type. I wrote a short story and asked him what I should do with it. He
paid me $100 for it. It's a good beginning, you know, I thought, and my agent at
the time, Fred Pohl, put it in an anthology. Wow, that's a way to start your
career. And it took me years to sell anything after that. I didn't write much
fiction. But very early on, I think maybe a second or third or fourth sale, I
sent a stainless steel rat story to John Campbell. He bought it as a novelette,
After that, my relationship with him was very close. I'd see him all the time,
work with him, in a sense collaborate with him. All my first five or six novels
were done as serials for analog. When I say collaborate, I would send John an
outline of an idea, a page or two of a book I'd like to do. I was thinking about
doing it. He sent that 18-page letter of what I could do with the book. He would
never tell you to do something. Do you ever think of
doing that? or that. And with his help, I developed a lot of tools, and I was a
typical Campbell writer. I read the magazine since I was born, I suppose, and I
didn't bend to John's will. I just wanted to be there as a Campbell writer, and
I really was a typical one for, I'd say, the first half dozen books until I had
an idea for a book I know John would not buy, a book called Build a Galactic
Hero, which I never submitted to him. And my feelings were right, I'll tell you,
years later, his office, and he said, why did you write that book? What book?
Bill, the Galactic Hero. I said, how do you know I wrote it? He
said, I saw it on the subway newsstand and I bought it. The whole thought of him
buying, he doesn't get enough slush pie, he had to go out and buy books. And I
gave him some waffling answer about why I wrote it, because it was the opposite
of everything he believed in and wanted to do. It was experimental prose. It was
anti-military. It put the boot to fascists and all the good things, you know.
You knew him very well and wrote for him and understood his
system. What's your comment to people who say some people think he had a very
healthy effect on science fiction, some people think he would have been better
off without it. No, very simple. John W. Campbell invented modern
science fiction. When he came along, it was just pulp garbage. He took it and
shaped it, what we see today John Campbell did. His personal attitude towards a
number of things, engineering-wise, politics-wise, I may disagree with, but I
disagreed with him at the time and told him so. But his overall effect on the
field, he did what you see today John Campbell did. Perhaps it had been done
eventually, but single-handedly, he, you know, stepped down from the mount with
the tablets and took this dismal fantasy field and developed it as modern
intellectual intelligent scientifically based science fiction it's going a lot
different ways since I mean now half of science fiction is pure fantasy the
solid core that he made people do is very very dim but without that core you
wouldn't have modern science fiction okay your first novel that was published
put the first science fiction novel that was published I should put it was Deathworld
okay and that's adventure fiction which is probably what you're noted for.
And Jason dinAlt was was your was your main character. How did that evolve? Did
Jason hit you and then the quiet or did he just come up? You were thinking of
this. Deathworld does a number of things. You mentioned the fact there's
adventure science-fiction. Well, don't laugh, but at that time in science
-fiction and which was Campbell, which was analog, if you were a true blue
reader you, well, you read startling stories and thrilling wonder because you
had to wait another three weeks for the next issue of Astounding. That's where
the action was. And he had, he's very cerebral. He had a whole novel of people
talking to each other. Nothing moving at all. No action. And I want to do a book
that had action part of the plot. I mean, that's sort of stupid to say now with
all the guns blowing heads away. I mean, that whole gore school and the whole
sword and sorcery, sword and butchery. I mean, there's action galore for no
reason at all. But in those days, It was getting dim, I thought. So I worked
out, but I didn't want to do an action plot for action, say. So I'm a great back
plotter. In the sense, I find a reason to do a book and then fit a book to the
reason. And the reason I wanted to have the action, I wanted to have a
realistic. So I thought it was Superman.
And in this book, you'll find, if you look at it closely, it's done in two or
three levels. The action plot's a surface. But there below that is the idea of
Superman that Nietzsche talked about, and that Superman Magazine talks about and
I'm very much against Superman physical Superman and if you look in the book
you'll see that if you are so brutalized to be physically a Superman you're
intellectual content is zero and I said that in a number of different ways and
very much against militarism and that's said in there a number of different ways
all of it couches an adventure plot and it's up to the reader to read whichever
way he wants and he'll find a good adventure plot if he wants to find even more
about it I remember when I first published it a reader in England came up to me
and I was looking for a great return from a literate Englishman about ah heavily
intellectual content and they said oh Eric I read that book I told my friends to
read all I like it you did what you tell me to say oh right I say it's all about
guns
Jason used used his knowledge his experience and his determination And always it
started out in the novels. He was the tape He would turn the tables by using
this sort of things. This is kind of character traits that you admire Not really
the the death world 2 and 3 came up by happenstance It's just that the character
was successful. I want to write another adventure style book, and I realized
after I wrote I left the ending open you had to get these people off that planet
a certain part of them had to leave they're just good for killing things. You
start thinking about it, and they're friends with his, and he's a weak man
personally, and he has, like I say, he supplies a part, so they don't supply.
They have the big bodies and the tiny, poignant heads. He's a weakling in their
terms, but he's a man of intelligence. So, therefore, I said, gee, what if we
went to another plant and he had a problem, he'd have to go along and organize
it, and then the plot developed. I did that once more, and that was the end of
it as far as I was concerned. And people ask for another Deathworld. No, I run
that particular plot device. Well, I was pinned into it. And it worked three
times. It worked pretty well. And I said, OK, Deathworld II, you may think it's
about going off and blowing things up and killing things and rushing around. It
really is. The entire book is about the difference in meaning between ethics and
ethos. And that's what it's about. I could be pinning over and over through that
thing. and a lot of guns go off and a lot of good things happen, you learn a bit
of Esperanto but also, what science fiction can do, it's a book that takes the
study of a philosophical question or a problem of meaning of meaning would you
ever do another one or do you just get tired of it? I didn't get tired of it, I
did a short story for the chemical memorial volume which I edited and then I did
an even shorter story a year or two ago for a games magazine they went and did a
Deathworld game and I had an idea, a rough plot. I did a short story to go in
the magazine, the game was designed around the story. But I feel no desire to. I
mean, I don't have to. Luckily at this stage in life I can write the books I
want to write and there's nothing there. I mean, what you see is what you get.
It's completing the trilogy, fine. Step sideways and salute and step out. To
kind of summarize, yes, it was a trilogy, but when you wrote Deathworld itself,
you didn't necessarily have that in mind. No. I wrote a book. After I finished
it, I realized I let an ambiguous ending to it in one sense. A lot of your
characters couldn't go on living unless they left that planet. That thought in
mind, I got another planet. Having finished that, I could see one more story
with the same group of characters. Did that, and that was the end. Okay. Then
the other famous hero from that time was the stainless steel rat, which is now a
Pentology, I guess. Yes. This is this is adventure science fiction, but it's
it's satirical, its a parody so I guess At the same time you're writing
adventure science fiction you were writing parody adventure science fiction
Yeah, right and nothing but well The humor I remember the basic idea It was just
that as I own the old rat says of them we have you know flesh and blood rats and
wooden buildings will have stinger steel rats and concrete ones it is basically
a very old idea of the villain as hero turn the world on his head this is what
you have in the saint who tend to pontificate a little bit too much it's way
Rupert of Hentsau and that prisoner of zender uh you all love him better than
we'd go to the goody goodies will do their job it is if you pardon the
expression my dear friend kingsley a man said a picaresque novel now don't be
ashamed you'll understand that means i said thanks kingsey and ran off to a
dictionary the picaresque novel is just that the villain as the hero is villain
villain as hero and when i realized that what i was doing that i had come onto a
formula and i was trying to get humor into it as well There was no humor in
science fiction. It was nothing that I was doing. Anyone else alive. A character
developed as it went along. And I get clues back from readers about it. And an
English reader told me he likes to read the thing because the hero does all the
thing he wished he could do against society and gets away with it. You know,
everyone hates bureaucracy. And I said, by God, you're right. I thought about it
in the very next rat book. The first chapter had nothing to do with the rest of
the book, if you look at it. It's just something happens to his dear wife,
Angelina, and the enemy hands her and he goes off. The enemy is the Internal
Revenue Service, the old IRS man, you know. He goes and burns out all the income
tax records for the whole planet cheering everybody up, you know, and the story
begins. But that's something we all wish could happen tomorrow except for the
people who work for the IRS. And the seven of them got busted for selling dope
in California. But it grew, it grew, let's say. What place does humor have in
science fiction? Very little. it could have a bigger one, and the answer is a
very mechanical one. Editors, for the most part, are dummies. And even the few
bright ones have their own particular taste in humor. That is a matter of taste.
You bring an adventure novel in, an editor will say, yeah, well, Harry's done
better, but it moves along, people are killed, I'll buy it. Bring a love story
in, oh, well, your girl gets kissed, you know, it's a little boring, but I'll
buy it. You bring in a humor novel, he doesn't laugh. He does not buy it. And
editors, if they laugh, I've heard them say, I want them to reject it, it was
too funny. They're afraid the readers won't laugh. So the only way you can sell
humor is have a reputation as a humor writer. And how do you get from being a
humor writer? You've got to sell a book, but you can't sell it. It's a catch-22
thing. And I snuck it in the Stainless Steel Rat. I went to make each one a little
bit funnier than the one before. And eventually, the editor was laughing,
readers were laughing, hurrah, I'm a humor writer.
Slippery Jim diGriz. DiGriz... ...you got it right first time. Okay. Was
another memorable character, so I'll ask kind of the same question again. Did
you think of him first, or the idea of the stainless steel rat, and then build a
character around that? The mechanics of how characters surface and are fleshed
out. How are the character... Oh, wait. I'm going to hold the answer for a
second. Thank you.
In science fiction, science fiction is not a character-based form of fiction.
You can have three-dimensional characters in science fiction. But the idea comes
first. This isn't an idea fiction. To form a fiction where you can have the idea
as hero, anything that has that, isn't what you call three-dimensional, have the
idea for a character who would do these things. which means far too often in
science fiction you get two-dimensional characters who just act the assigned
role of the plot given to by the author and we don't mind reading that you
really want to read about the action to make good science fiction viable
interesting fun science fiction when you have to assign the character the role
you must build his character as a character that's where the are committed to
things in all kind of fictions the craft of science fiction constructing your
plot the art of science fiction is making your characters three-dimensional
which is true for any character I write I very rarely in science fiction do you
have character based fiction yeah that brings us to bill he was he was a dummy
yeah it's an unmitigated spoof yeah Well, Bill, the Galactic Hero. There again, he
was assigned the role. He was, you know, the good soldier Shveik. He is the guy
who gets it in the neck all the time and happened to be a science fiction army.
And I think it just exploded to me. Having been in the army and seated here in
the heart of the military, I'm a better enlisted man. I have the highest rank in
the army, that of sergeant. You have to get the general before you get anything
higher. Second lieutenant, you know it. grubs to be walked on. And it's a whole
different attitude. And the officers like the military. They like to tell people
what to do. And usually what they tell them to do is not for the good of the
people they're talking to. They should get killed for it. We're like, but the
enlisted men want to stay alive. As Assyrian said in Catch-22, they're trying to
kill me. He didn't mean the enemy. He meant the army he was in. And knowing all
this, reading all this, Catch-22 came out. I was a great fan of Candide. And
when I saw Catch-22, what he did, Heller did, he showed that there's things so
awful that you have to laugh at them to understand them. If you're doing a
military novel, he'd say blood, blood, death, intestines from the trees. About
the 20th time, you hang the intestines from the trees, you're tired of looking
at them. It's like spaghetti after a while. Repetition of horror doesn't make
horror, and that's all you can do. The army is utterly horrible, boring, and
wasteful. military life is boring and wasteful and in there I parodied a few of
the novels just for fun event but the thing that goes right through it is the
understanding the military I usually I discovered that I had a Korean War
veteran call to me and be the combat marine and won't have his face all shot
away and yes yes he said you know Bill, the Galactic Hero I said yes looking for a
chair to hide behind he said i've got a copy of every edition of that book i
carry it through to combat you know and that tells a story another guy was a
same thing john paul he was a uh a real green beret the kind of had a bangle he
worked with the montagnards not like john wing with a fake one you know he was
up there and he killed things a great killing and uh it was like you know
napoleon's troops carried a marshals baton in their pack he carried a copy of
billy collector or all through the Korean War up there killing gooks and
everything, and he used to get his rookies in. He'd read them a chapter every
night, whether they liked it or no. He'd break them in half. So I really feel
that it's humor and parody and a lot of fun, but it tells you something about
the military condition that is absolutely dead true. It's funny. My next
question is Bill the Galactic Hero is a slap at making war in the military
mind. Is this what you feel? And I said you also got in some links at the
bureaucracy as well. Yes, so all that was answered. And that, and the one thing.
Yeah, and you did, you spoofed the pulp, kind of the old science fiction pulp
traditions too. I mean there was a spoof of Tranter. That's right. And I, the
pro-military novels like Starship Trooper, you know, where everyone's being kind
to each other. I mean, in fact, I saw Norman Spinrad put it in an article the
other week. As Harry Harrison said, Bill Glaggier, it's always Bob, your buddy,
week. And this was, we said in the Army, in a novel whose name I shall not
mention, the guy in a heavy space armor is going down, and all friends come to
rescue him, you know. And in Bill, the guy goes in a swamp, and the soldiers are
marching by. He says, help me, help me. And they walk on by. He says, what is
this, Bob, your buddy, week? And they say, it's always Bob, your buddy, week.
It's usually saying the army you know. I mean, it always is. It's every man for
himself. Normally, normally, you'd expect to get it put in and broken off and
usually does. There are some References in there. I wonder in several
generations from now how they'll stand up. I know the ship he was on was the
Christine Keeler
Yeah, well, I should I should revise versions of that every 10 years, you know.
But there was The Good Ship Trotsky. That'll stand. Also, the British edition,
the goal is to be afraid to use Christine Keel. I had a change at the Fannie
Hill. So much for the publicity of publishers.
Okay. Make Room, Make Room, which is probably your serious novel, the one that
you're known for, that sort of thing. And the topic was overpopulation. And you
obviously, when I read it, you obviously felt very strongly about population,
and yet you didn't preach. How did you walk that thin line, and you must feel
strongly about it. Yeah. Science fiction tends to preach, and tell you
things, you know. It goes back to the old pubs. When you wanted to say, he said,
tell them what you're going to tell them, tell them, and tell them you told
them. And all the early science fiction, they go into you time machine, and
there'll be the young assistant, or a young girl, a young guy, and he said, Tell
me, professor, how does it work? Two and a half pages later, you learn how it
works. I put the book in the technical time machine. I had the same thing
happen. And the guy says, Gee, professor, how does the time machine work? And
the professor says, You're too stupid to understand! And I thought a good
explanation.
Science fiction is that the auditory finger tells you what to do and how to do
it. And I felt very serious about population. At that time I wrote the book,
there were no fictional works on population. There were no... These popular non
-fiction books hadn't come out. The world was completely unaware of where we
were going. I could see it, I lived in Mexico and watched what was happening.
You read the Learn journals, they told you about it. So I wanted to do a
propaganda work that was disguised as not being propaganda. And so I
said in the year 1999 New York, it makes a millennial novel. It brings a lot of
overtones, you know, the millennium, coming of Christ and this sort of thing.
And I didn't want to lecture. So I very simply started a book, put the
characters in the world, went along for almost a fifth of the book and got
everyone involved before someone turned to one character, the older character.
How did the world get this way? At this point, I felt that the reader was
trapped enough to take one page of lecture. And I sent the book in my entry and
said, Harry, they're trapped enough to take four pages of lecture. So I just put
in four pages, a copy of about a thousand words, two pages in the book, telling
you how it worked out that way. One little lecture right there, having done that
little lecture, because the book was, in a sense, a work of propaganda and art.
If you're better the art, the better the propaganda. 1984 is propaganda. On the
beach is propaganda. They're both art. You get the message. That was it. After
that, I worked around the point, and if you were alive and warm, you understood
it, and readers did. Okay. Yeah, I had the kind of here, the shortages
of materials, water, food, electricity were all made very real by the text. You
weren't lecturing. It was just obvious and the reader could picture it. I
thought, maybe that might harken back to your artist days about how you
visualize things. Well, I think, having worked as an artist for a number of
years, I see in my mind when I'm writing. I have a stage of people walking
around and I see what's in the background, the foreground. I hear the waves
splashing. and see them splashing. And as always in writing, you should never
tell you should show. And good writing is hard work. It should be transparent.
The rears should not see how you got the effect. And one of the best ways, of
course, it's hard to do is never say. The world is full of a lot of people.
Never say they're short of water. Show them on a line to get water out of a
standpipe and then you know you're shorter water and and dramatize a need for
the water and this is where your art comes in
which far too often if that writer cannot do that then he's not doesn't succeed
on that level people read his book for fun you know if you get the reader
emotionally involved can trapped into the book and he comes out the end maybe
not agreeing with you at least he knows what you said he will be thinking
thinking about it and I had one girl read that book in New York and she said if
I thought the world would be like that I'd commit suicide I said don't don't.
Mere accurate thinking that means you're going to vote right and work so this
world will not appeal. That's a science fiction admonishing finger again saying
shape up or ship out. If you don't do this you'll get that. I also viewed this
as a detective novel, is that fair? It's fair all of science fiction for the
most part is based on detective plot. about, it's a mystery, will it be solved?
Even if they're not called like, Hal Clements is not officially a mystery, you
want to find how you got that way, will they solve the problem? Will they all
live? Will they get all this world? Will they do it? That was a deliberate bit
of my plot, a plot device and mine, that I wanted to show society from the
lowest levels to the high. I wanted to show how everybody lived in that world.
So I used a very simple device of having a detective as protagonist and a very
simple story. And we all know at the beginning who did the You knew what was
going to happen. And it was not important, but it was a device to move the story
along and like most crimes in New York, 90% aren't solved, just by chance that
they are, this was a way of getting you into the various levels of stress as a
society.
I've got to ask you then, they made a movie out of it. Called it Soylent Green,
threw in some, made it cannibalism. Did you have anything, anything to do like
with the screen play or any input or was that But that just, you just had to
watch your baby get changed. First time I heard about the fact that they wanted
to make a film out of this book was when I was approached for a contract, and I
signed it. And then it turned out the firm that bought it was a front for MGM,
and they sold MGM for $1. They hate to pay the writer a decent fee, but for some
reason they pay everyone else. They don't like to pay writers in Hollywood. one.
Then it turned out that the producer, Walter Zeltzer, and lead actor Chuck
Heston had been trying to sell to MGM for five years, and they couldn't sell.
MGM thought that overpopulation wasn't important enough to do a film on. So they
then got a moronic screenwriter who put in the cannibalism. He thought they'd
eat that up in MGM, and they did. They thought it'd be a great idea for a film.
So it was bought as a cannibalism film. And I saw the screenplay and it was
pretty atrocious and I could not do anything, by contract I couldn't change one
word. So what I did do, I kept saying memos, what was wrong, physically, how it
could not work and they made a lot of changes. I went down the set and pointed
out things that hadn't been done and I gave copies of books to all the actors
and all the technical people and they got very interested and I talked to Eddie
Robinson. I remember he talked to Dick Fleischer. I heard him say, I don't
understand where I'm so severe, what is this role and then no way if I can that
rotten screen play what it was so I I ask if I could talk to my to do this
myself and we had lunch I said I wrote the book Oh that's very interesting the
literate man art collector you know I explained that in the book and the year
2000 that is me my army record my age here the old man is the only person who
knew the girl good world as it is The only person who lived when the world was
green. He said that's a good idea it's not bad having got that much. He went
away and acted. A lot of that was created on camera. Interface between the
director and the actors. And I like to think myself that I was there all the
time. And I like to feel A, it was my book. And B, if there was some worth in
the film I helped to add to it. So you were the... I can't remember his name.
The character? Oh, I forget myself. Yeah, the old man, Sal. So you were him. In
a sense, it was. To keep him as a three-dimensional character, I just used
myself when I'd be at that age. I don't want to live in that world. That's why I
wrote the book. I do not want to be that person at that time. And there again,
the technical people were so tremendous and the acting was so good. And it does
what science fiction does so well, background as foreground. You go to see it's
a stupid little detective plot, And you know it's going to be bodies made in the
soylent green. And then about a week later, you start thinking about that
horrible world, that green world you're living in. My god. And it succeeds in
that play. It's sort of a shocker, an emotional shocker. It worked. I think it
worked pretty well as a film. There have been no complaints. It's the only film
MGM made money on that year. That was a year of the Great Walls. That was a bomb
that cost $14 million and grossed $500,000. So MGM should be happy and the rest
of them should be happy. I can't complain. Okay, the last two books we've talked
about then, Make Room, Make Room and Bill, the Galactic Hero, Bill with the war
-mongering human race, and Make Room, Make Room with the overpopulation. It's
kind of a grim, pessimistic future, and it says something about human nature. Is
that human nature? Do you think we better be careful, or that's us? Yeah, well,
human nature is human nature. You can't guess what it is. It's there for you to
see. And I like to talk about it and think about it. I like to see where it
might be going. I like to think about it. And sometimes it's very grim.
Sometimes it's very funny. I write the funny books and cheer myself up between
writing the grim books. There's not that many grim books when you get down to
it. Make Room is about population and how we're destroying our planet through
stupidity with even when the president's involved in destroying the planet. You
know, destroying our heritage, spaceship, Earth. All logical arguments which are
being ignored by those in control. And then I'm anti-war, and that's about it as
far as the deep thought books go. They're two big, deep things. You'll find
these themes reoccur in other books. But they're two, I think, very obvious and
simple things. It can't be said too often. I'm against war for keeping what
we've got. That's not too bad. They just elected a party in Germany, the Green
Party, on the basis of just that much. They got 5%? They had enough of the vote,
about 5%, to get 25 people in the Bundestag. Okay, to kind of just hit on some
of the other fiction, Planet of No Return was fairly recently published, and it
was a sequel to Planet of the Damned. Right. Is that something you'd thought
about doing? No, no. They're just... The extra it is of publishing produced
Strange Offspring. I wrote Planet of the Damned years ago, in a way it's Death
World one more time there's slight differences. I wrote Deathworld five or six
times on one guide for another until I decided to break out to build a galactic
hero. And did that, it was complete unto- itself. And then a few years ago, the
publisher was doing these illustrated books, which really are just juveniles,
that's what they are, they're really short novels with pictures in them for
kids. And unlike most science fiction writers, I ran out of money at the time.
And he said, Harry, are you doing an illustrated book for me? I said, no. He
said, we'll give you an X number of a thousand dollars. And I said, yes. And I
shopped around my older books. And so I could do a sequel. We have a fast-paced
adventure book with a little content as well, a little bit about women's rights
in there. If you look closely at the end, you know, they're all male fascist
swine, these guys. They love to kill each other. And a little bit of a plot,
mystery plot. It's been an option for a film to make a nice, fast film. You
know, it was not a bad book. It's a juvenile, done for a certain market. Not
ashamed or proud of it. Just a book I did, and there it is. Okay. I've kind of
grouped you with Technicolor Time Machine, Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers,
Tunnel Through the Deeps. Those are humorous books you apparently interspersed
with your serious books for the reason you're doing. Not really. I don't really
set out to alternate books. Many times, it was thrust upon you. In A Technical
or Time Machine, I implied this was a very, very serious book. Time travel, and
I got this paparazzo over the Italian camera back facing this great big 9-foot
tall flies, and I started to laugh. And it came out funny. But if you look,
there's a very solid time travel plot, which could be a serious book. Except I
suddenly realized, I started laughing, and I'm laughing, why shouldn't the
readers laugh? And the way the thing went, it took off that way. and it had that
serious structure beneath it, Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers, I was feeling a
deadly mood one day, and I was so tired of rubbish, so tired of... You know,
dear old Doc Smith wrote his space operas back in the 30's and 40's, that was a
long time ago and it's a period form of art I think it's dead, but I keep seeing
certain writers, which shall be nameless, rehashing old space operas, I said,
oh, I've had enough of this. So I said, why not just put the boot to all the
space offers at one time and have fun doing it? And I made internal parodies of
everyone I could think of. People accuse me of hating Doc Smith. I said, no, I
don't like – I love Doc Smith. I grew up reading Doc Smith but I just don't – I
think I feel it's dead. I'd like to put a tombstone over it. Not that you ever
can in fiction. They're still going on doing it anyway. But I enjoy myself. The
readers enjoy it. I mean, the two kind of readers. Some say, you're hating Doc
Smith. You know, they chase me around. Others say, oh, I feel a hole. my
chairman, you know, so there it is. It takes your choice. Okay. The series I
read before we came here was the To the Stars series. I don't know if that's
your name for it or not. Yeah, that's my name, yeah. I thought, well, I
personally thought the covers on the American editions were terrible. I didn't
show a damn thing. The guy with the guns. I kind of liked it because it gave
you, the first book, here's this guy, and he's this urbane, sophisticated man
and a man about the world and the rich and then it's then the next novel it's an
adventure novel and then it kind of is a is a hybrid third one and I kind of
enjoyed that because you kind of got to show all your facets even some humor
touch
here and there yeah book it comes about came about the trilogy came about
through the inability I have to just take a I know what I got the idea from and
I was in California on the freeway with my friend Brian Aldis. We didn't have a
horrible English Sprite which is about a 20 inches high and 2 feet wide. And it
goes a maximum of 50 miles an hour. And we're trundling along a five-lane
freeway, California 5, great big articulated trucks and trails going by with 14
foot high wheels. I'm looking at the bottom of hubcaps, you know, trying to keep
the thing going straight. I had a vision at that point of a world where trucks
ran forever on and on and through around the whole plan. I said, how could we do
that? So I had to develop a whole plan and a culture to get them there. And by
the time I'd done it and written the book, the editor said, I feel it's
incomplete. How did I get there in the first place? And what happened to that
revolution afterwards? I said, you're right. I got so much plotting in here. I
have a whole book before and a book afterwards. So I took the character. He'd
ride this plan for nameless reasons. And it ended with a revolution which was
going wrong. So I went back and told you how he got there. Took an Earth. And I
closed the book together in the final one. They came out different. The middle
one was written first. They had to be a different aspect. Then the third one, of
course, put the first two together. As you said, I used different things at
different times in there. High technology and enjoyment of technology and a
little bit of politics. And the first one in some ways like a make room, make
ruins and where we're going to go if we don't get a hold of technology and what
we can do. If you notice, the first book shows you how rotten Britain will be
500 years from now, the third book, how rotten America will be 500 years from
now, and all done for good intentions with lack of knowledge of how to go about
taking care and helping people, and they're both rotten worlds. So there again
the admonitory thing is being shaken. You must get technologies involved. You
must do somehow, not guess, you must just somehow do a better job of ruling the
world, you know. We're in a technological world and nobody in the British
Parliament or American state of legislation knows anything about science. I mean
a bunch of ex-lawyers and politicians. Politicians have one motivation in life,
that's to get reelected. Look at the whole Nixon trouble that came about because
all he wanted to do was be re-elected and doesn't care what you do and that's
the wrong thing i'm not saying i can't see any easy answers to i'm just saying
that there are answers we are now a technological evolution we now are going
into the computer world and no one has consistently thought what will happen to
most people and in a way behind all the adventure stories there is a
consideration of those problems the character i almost thought was the strongest
character in those in that trilogy of the first Last book was The Brother-in
-Law. Again, his name escapes me. I thought I had it written down. Yes. The
Brother-in-Law character. Did you have somebody in mind? Not really. A question
that you ask is the Brother-in-Law, whose name I forget, the hyphenate, and
George Barlington Stone or something. If you look closely, like I say, I'm not
pretending to be subtle. I'm saying that I am subtle. I'm saying if you examine
these books, you'll find a couple of levels. The first book plot-wise and
character-wise is a tip of the hat, a nod of the head to George Orwell's 1984. I
even used the word pints, leaders for pint, and they were his thing when they
were drinking leaders instead of pints. I used the word pros. I put the clues in
there for you to find. And the brother-in-law character is the same torturer
character from was it Brian O'Brien? No, Brian. O'Brien was the other fellow. It
is the man who knows he's evil and is in charge of an evil society, and that's
why he's in the first book. But having not killed him off in the first, he has
to appear again, and then you get what I thought was the only truthful ending,
an ambiguous ending to the third one. People hate me for it. What happened? I
said, that's what life is. Fiction gives you easy answers, but in real life
there are no easy answers, you know. That's why I really liked about it. It was
not clear-cut. That is life. That is life. Okay, I want to talk to you a little
bit then. You've also done a lot of editing. You slandered editors. Yes, I
slandered editors. That's right, because having edited a number of pulp
magazine, having edited 85 anthologies, I can knock editors.
That's not an easy job, is it? It's not a hard job. It's easier than writing. A
successful editor
actually doesn't just copy edit, an editor who purchases stories and prints
them in a magazine or a book editor has to have tastes that match the public.
The skills attached are very minor. You can learn to copy edit and to correct.
Not to correct. Two things good editors have. That is, their taste match the
public enough. What they buy, people will read, their publishing house succeeds.
secondly better editors have editorial taste where they can take and tell a
writer how he can improve his book or his short story that that's something
that's like a skill like writing and they're not the same skill both editors
can't write most writers can't ever and just by chance I have never fallen into
this I enjoy it a certain amount of them I'm through now with editing and I
think it helps my own writing there again I like to refer back to my own work
when When I've done a draft or two of a book, I try very, very hard to step out
of the role of author and look at that as an editor would. Is it working? I
mean, this is not common to me. I mean, Hemingway said years ago, he said, every
good writer has an inborn automatic shit detector. You smell your manuscript. If
it smells bad, you throw it out. And there again, you know, goes into making an
author, a lot of different skills. And they all work. They work. They don't
forget it. Apparently, the editor that edited Wheel Worlds said, hey, you needed
a beginning and an ending. They did you a service, so editors can... The girl
said, she said, I feel it's not complete. There's more to it. I said, I can't
expand it. There's no way. The second book Wheel Worlds is complete unto itself.
It begins where it has to begin and ends where it has to end. It started me
thinking, yeah, so in a sense a good editor pointed out out. But normally I
would have just said, no, it succeeds where it is. But then again, I was in
financial problems. I said, by God, I've got a trilogy here and written in one
book. And two years later, I had three books instead of one, which helps. They
package them nicely. They go three into one and works very well. Okay. We've
talked. Before we ask a question, let me see my life. Oh, yeah. Watch what we're
on.